Can you?
Can you guys hear me?
Yep.
We can hear.
OK perk.
Yeah, awesome. OK, perfect.
So this is our last class.
Again,
thank you so much for for choosing this
class.
Awesome.
So we're gonna go through the the
presentations, right?
So I already sent out the the
presentation order to you guys.
Let me share my screen.
Right.
So then the first group will be Group 415
minute presentation and five minute Q&
A and then Group five, Group One, Group 3.
And then we're gonna have a break.
And then group 10, six,
and two gonna do the second-half.
After that.
Please spend like 5 minutes to do the
class evaluation right?
So then I believe sometime this week.
The the ratings information gonna be
important for us to design the next class
for the A I ML.
Area for the finance department.
So then just spend some time to do the
course evaluation.
There is no dress code for this.
For the for your presentation.
But please, right.
So please turn on your camera.
And and and show us.
Who are the presenters? Right.
I believe I still miss two groups of two
groups.
Their presentation.
Let me show you.
So right now I have 6.
So group two,
I don't have your presentation.
If you guys are still here,
you guys need to submit a presentation
here. Group four,
they just sent me the presentation.
So I think I'm gonna leave the stage.
I stopped sharing so I will leave the
stage to Group 4.
I will be using this Google timer.
To gauge the 15 minute.
So once you start presenting I'll I'll
start timer.
I'll I'll send you a reminder through the
chat that is like one minute to the end,
OK.
So Group 4, are you sorry? Is it group 2?
Yeah, Group 4. Are you guys ready?
Not your fault.
Yeah.
Are you gonna share the presentation or
do you want us to share the presentation?
I I think you guys can share the
presentation because I think you guys
know what you are presenting.
So then so then it's you.
Yeah.
You'd better just control your your pace.
Sounds good, Jayden or Chris.
For some reason my share screen is not
working right now.
If any of you guys could do it.
I can try Chris.
You wanna give it a shot too, on your end?
So Group 4, you still have four people,
right? So Chris?
Yeah.
Andrew and Vargas Christian. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it's Christian, yeah.
Yeah.
Please turn on your camera if you're
presenting.
Like when I said there's no dress code,
but please turn on your camera.
Well, OK.
When whenever you guys are ready?
For some reason my camera isn't working.
It says we can't access it one second
here.
Let me try rejoining.
Chris,
could you guys get the screen share thing
to work or no?
Mine is not letting me do that right now.
What is this?
Not know why this camera's working one
second here.
Chris,
are you able to share the presentation by
chance?
OK, just to save the time,
I can present it.
I can share the presentation for you guys.
Share my screen just to save the time.
This is your presentation, right?
Yes, perfect.
Yep, that's it.
OK.
Do you mind if I just go this way?
Is that is that OK?
Yeah. No, that's perfect.
Yeah. Perfect.
OK, OK.
So go ahead.
Awesome. Well, hey everyone.
We are.
Andrew Jaden, Christian and Chris,
and we're excited to share our AI in
finance final project from April.
And Mark university.
So welcome to predicting stock closing
prices. With LSTM,
we set out to predict the daily closing
price of JP Morgan Chase stock or JPM,
which is tough because prices shift with
market changes using machine learning
model called LSTM.
Aim to make accurate predictions to help
investors.
So let's dive into how we did it and what
we found.
Perfect.
So our problem was to predict JP Morgan
Chase's daily closing prices,
which is tricky because stock prices
fluctuate a lot due to market changes.
We used machine learning to see if we
could make accurate predictions comparing
economic data like interest rates with
technical data like moving a.
This matters because predictions can help
investors decide when to buy or sell JPM
stock.
We measured success with metrics like
RMSE, Mae.
5% tolerance accuracy.
And direction accuracy to see how close
we got.
We chose JPM Chase because it's a $500
billion market cap bank with a huge
impact and millions of its shares are
traded daily.
So even a 1% prediction edge can mean big
profits.
Our project scope was to build machine
learning models using Lstms which are
perfect for time series like stock data
to predict jpm's daily prices.
We compare 2 models,
one using economic data.
Plus.
Scholar estate.
And another mixing economic and technical
data using 10 years of daily data from
2015 to 2025,
we had to preprocess this data,
create features and evaluate accuracy
with metrics like RMSE to see what worked
best for us.
Next slide.
Mm hmm.
Yes.
So talking more about how we prepared our
data,
we pull about 2593 trading days of JP
Morgan stock data from 2015 to 2025 using
Yahoo's finance library.
We also grab seven daily economical
indicators like treasury rates and the
fix index from the thread API.
To capture.
Kind of the broader market picture and
then we calculated.
Can you go indicators like moving average
and stochastic?
K also to spot more of like the trends in
the momentum.
So if the stock merging all all this by
date was tricky because we had a couple
of missing days,
but we ended up with 555 engineering
features to feed into our model.
We go to the next slide.
Yeah. So on this slide,
we're basically highlighting our key
features,
which is technical indicators on the top
right.
Well,
we also have economic variables like
treasury rates and VIX are in the bottom
right.
We found that like features like
yesterday's price are super important for
lstm's because.
They help models like spot trends in time
series data.
You can see in this graph.
Of JP Morgan's closing price from 2016 to
2024,
which also shows Roland statistics like
moving average, and it's 'cause.
These features are key to our improved
model success with technical indicators
showing hiker relations.
With like the EMA and the closing price.
You can go to the next slide.
Mm hmm.
All right. So yeah,
I'll talk a little bit about our model
architecture on the right side.
You're gonna see the LSTM code that we
actually made,
but just to kind of breakdown what a long
short term memory model is,
that's what an LCM is.
It's kind of a tool that just analyzes
past trends to help predict future stocks.
Now this is also by using things called
memory cells to track the patterns and
then epochs as which are referred to as
these training rounds where it actually
learns from the data over time.
So another area that you'll see in our
model is we used A2 layer LSTM with 50
and 25 units and the reason being we did
this was kind of just to capture both the
short and the long term trends in the
price or in the stock.
Data in general and then we added a
dropout rate of .3 and AL two regular.
I always have trouble saying this
regularization with the Lambada of 0.03.
What these are is it pretty much just
allows to prevent for over fitting.
But it's also important for keeping the
model from any like learning noise or any
disruptive variables.
And lastly,
we use something called an atom optimizer
with early stopping within the for 50
epochs and with that is just more for the
training for training efficiently and if
we want to scale things.
If it's learning at a quicker rate,
we can always decrease that and it.
Was able we scaled all of our features
using between zero and one using
something called.
Min Max scaler.
And that's just to kind of help better
enhance the performance.
So you can move on to the next one.
So kind of looking at our training
history, difference on the top,
what you're gonna see is the economic
variable, the economic variables,
plus the stochastic K and on the bottom,
the improved LSTM is actually just the
ones using economic indicators.
But what we can see is the one
specifically with just technical
indicators did much better with
validation lapse dropping between 0.
1 and stabilizing by about 17 epochs.
And then the economic only model,
you can see it actually struggling a lot
more even with the stochastic a helping
with you know its momentum variability
because like we see on daily.
On daily moving data specifically for
economic variables,
they need some type of momentum
indication.
And you can see kind of it lost.
It didn't really do the best tree Crest a
lot.
Slowly, only hitting a .
1 after a 30 epochs and its validation
lost kind of fluctuated around .2.
And that kind of showed us that, you know,
these technical indicators are really
things that are showing strong
significance and improvement and accuracy
around the long short term memory
learning patterns.
And it makes it just more faster and more
reliable.
So you can move on to the next slide.
So what we're gonna look at here is this
is our technical indicator only benchmark.
So we had trained from 2015 all the way
until about 2023 where we trained from.
I think this was April of 2023 all the
way until April of 2025.
What we can see is root mean squared
error of .038, a mean absolute error of .
029.
And we did something called a tolerance
accuracy.
I see and pretty much what that is.
Mm hmm.
Is it measures the percent of prediction
that fall within a certain range?
So the reason we did this was to kind of
in our case it was a 5% range.
So what we wanted to do is we want to see
how it was in that range at first and
then kind of improve on it moving forward
compared to actual price.
And then that way we could just see how
the model actually interacts with
interacts within that range.
And then as we continue to move forward,
we see how the accuracy gets better.
And then our directional accuracy, so.
It was kind of underperforming.
It was only 51% accurate and what we're
going to probably try to do is add more
momentum base or even sentiment based
data to try to kind of fix those
directions and get it a little bit closer
to where we need to be. So you can.
Go to the next slide.
So now this is our economic only
benchmark.
You can see there's a significant
difference.
Our rude mean squared error was the .36.
Our mean absolute error was 29,
which is pretty bad.
I mean,
you can see by the chart and even the 5%
tolerance accuracy fell within a 6%
accuracy and our directional accuracy was
47%.
This is just again, just more of a visual.
When we look side by side in comparison
to how these actual technical indicators
work versus our economic indicators.
You can see that it really doesn't
perform the best and that you know there
are economic variables that can help a
lot. Even though we had,
I think the highest percent correlation
we saw to close price was,
I think one of the the Treasury bills,
which was only.
Like 50%,
but then you could see on the other ones
with higher correlations like closer to
99 to 98%.
These are ones that actually make the
true difference when we're trying to
forward predict.
So you can go to the next slide.
Chris, you're mute or we can't hear you.
We still can't hear you.
Studigan area.
No, I cannot hear you, Chris.
I mean,
I could always just take over just cause
of sound doesn't work.
It's no big deal.
OK.
Just for like timing's sake.
Yep.
Yeah.
So some challenges that we faced was the
stock alignment.
So when I was pulling both from Fred and
we were pulling both from the Fred API
and from the Wi-Fi ***** import,
we noticed that our economic variables
were or economic data expanded out to,
you know, 2691 and our stock was only.
To 2593 and that kind of goes into our
next issue.
Where it's like we, you know,
by filling in this missing data,
we wanna make sure we didn't introduce
any bias or put any, you know,
misinform or like misdata inputs 'cause
that can actually mess a lot with our
accuracy of our model and more so on the
REL.
Side.
Another thing is is another challenge was
our long short term memory models are
really sensitive to scale.
So you know the fitting and the training
of the models with all the variables were
difficult.
So what we had to do was rather than
using like these fifty to 60 or these 40
to 50 different variables,
we try to narrow it down.
On to only using 10 to 15 of them,
the highest amount of correlation and
then another thing was is the economic
variable didn't use any trend base.
So that's why we try to use our
stochastic to kind of help with that
momentum shift.
But even with that variable,
it still really didn't do much for the
model itself.
As you can see with the big you know
price gaps that you saw in accuracy,
another thing.
Too is overfitting the models and that's
why that training loss is really
important because that's kind of how we
see whether or not or.
How the model is training over time
through those epoch tests and then
finding the right daily economic
variables?
A lot of like the main variables that you
want to look at,
it's difficult on a daily basis because
there's only so many.
But if you want to look at it like the
ones that are more important or more on
those quarterly to yearly basis that we
want.
To look at so those would be kind of
better if you're trying to predict
something like maybe line items in an
earnings call.
Just because you get that variability on
that quarter to quarter basis.
You can go to the next slide.
What we learned,
and this was really cool project I've
worked with these.
We've all worked with these.
I do this a little bit with work,
but we also got to see the testing
various data types can significantly
impact your accuracy like we were able to
see between the economic indicators and
the technical analysis indicators.
Another thing too is long short term
models can be really helpful tools for
traders in this sense.
For stock price prediction,
it's not necessarily something that you
should fully rely on,
but it is used as a tool so you can sign
it kind of see the directionality of
where.
You know, to buy or sell assets at time.
Other thing too is going into it.
AI models are not foolproof.
Models can make big mistakes and swing
some volatility,
especially if you can't totally account
or have the right variables to measure
for them.
Coding these models are a lot harder than
like people think.
I remember when we first started this
project like I we had scraped through a
bunch of different GitHub accounts to try
to figure out, you know,
where was a good basis to start.
But some models are depreciated over time
and don't have updated packages.
And things, but also too.
It was like a lot of trial and error with
trying to figure out, you know,
what was the best fit for what?
The variables that we were using.
And then lastly,
this can also be applied to a lot of
other topics, so you.
Can use this of even you can use not only
just numerical variables,
but you can also try to use categorical
variables and do something like
predicting you know predicting loan
defaults, credit risk, various other.
Different type of areas of prediction.
And in the last slide.
So the next steps is implement a like a
layer stack for reoccurring neural
network.
For more of that pattern recognition to
try to improve the accuracy.
Another thing too is feature selection.
So maybe just add like a sentiment
analysis,
a rolling sentiment analysis to try to
help more with those momentum swings?
I would like to back test it just to see
how it would or how it went act,
maybe in a shorter time frame because it
seemed like for those first years it had
a lot closer accuracy.
And then lastly we're going to try to
implement like forecasting so.
Forward-looking without any so like
forward-looking from today's dates April
28th.
So maybe trying to go 10 days in advance
to see how the forecast looks.
And that is our presentation.
It sounds good.
For a matter of fact,
you guys still have like 42nd anything to
add?
OK, save US 40 seconds.
Thank you.
Yes.
Any questions for folks?
Set 5 minute mark.
The questions qna. Any questions.
OK, my question.
So then I understand you're just
predicting daily close price,
so that if I ask you guys to make it a
real time trading tool.
What is the top three?
Mm hmm.
Difficulties that you feel you're gonna
this this call is gonna feel gonna gonna
face.
Probably the most difficult area I would
say is going to be kind of going back
through and engineering the sides of like
what indicates is buy and sell because
The.
that like as we narrowed it down to 15
variables,
one thing that we could do is kind of do.
Like a PCA component where we actually
look out of those 15 variables that apply
Other.
to it,
we can pick like four or five that will
Mm hmm.
move the most and those are the ones that
indicate whether we're going to buy or
sell an asset.
Another thing too though,
if we're going to do it on a trade.
Rating basis. I feel like it depends.
If you wanna do daily or if you wanna do
like minute based almost like a high
frequency style.
With this model you'll it'll still
struggle on a lower time.
It could do well on a lower time basis
but the only I.
Mean the only issue we're gonna see is
like,
how are we gonna scale and rework in
feature engineer all the data?
I feel like that would be a really big
difficult area.
Especially on the economic side,
because there's no really like time like
5 minute or one minute based economic
indicators that we can really.
Use.
Great.
And then reliability of the backtest too.
So it's like, you know,
as much as the backtest we can pass we
there's also been a lot of issues that
I've seen online where people have in the
industry have made notes that there are
certain styles and certain back tests
that you should kind of stay away.
From and some some that you should
implement.
So it's kind of finding the right one for
our model.
What I would I could see be pretty
difficult.
Sounds good.
So then in the next steps you said
implement RN along with long short term
memories, right?
So then why do you think implementing RNN
will be helpful?
Mm hmm.
Because RNN is usually gonna slow down
your your running time, right?
So then you know you eventually wanna
push it to the real time trading.
Mm hmm.
Kind of tool and then adding RNN is not
going to help you, right?
Yeah.
Just going into slow you down South then
I I just wondering like,
why do you think RNN?
Will be a good addition to our our LSTM.
I feel like pattern recognition side.
It's kind of just another.
OK.
It's another stack of learning.
So even though it is going to take kind
of longer for us to run and that
essentially it could get us to the area
where at least we have,
Mm hmm.
we can stray away from using that
tolerance accuracy and we can go more
direct and get us to the.
Level of higher precision.
If I mean grant,
we aren't looking at it necessarily at
the sense of like a trading style,
but it's like we chose a long short term
memory as more of a long term.
But by stacking on top again.
And we can kind of get that,
even though it will take longer for us to
train.
We can get a little bit of more.
It's on the push for closer accuracy I
guess.
OK, sounds good.
I I just wanna hear your.
Your thought process doesn't have to be
like right or wrong.
Just wanna know like how you know how do
you answer your question right?
Yeah.
So then perfect.
Mm H.
One last comment, right.
So then you can there is actually a
transformer based time series prediction
tool.
OK.
That you I need to find the name of it.
I totally forgot.
It's quite new and I think for the
pattern recognition purposes.
Purposes, I think you gonna help you guys.
This is up to that.
OK.
You can definitely leverage it.
Will it will be using like similar model
that the large language model is based
upon and you know the transformer kind of
attention model is really good at
recognizing different patterns that you
can use.
Not necessarily.
Saying that you're gonna be really more
Yeah.
accurate than LSTM in predicting those
close price for what?
Stock.
But there's something that worth trying.
This is really something that really new
I believe is a 23 or 24 year kind of a
new model in the market.
Is it like a bird style transformer that
they use?
I I forgot.
I just want my colleague brought it to my
attention.
We tried it.
Definitely help us in predating some
areas, but the issue of that model is,
Mm hmm.
you know,
it's a new model and a hyper parameter
tuning is really hard,
but I can find the name of it and send it
Yeah.
to you, Andrew.
Yeah. Awesome. That'd be great.
Yeah. Perfect.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you so much for Group 4.
Next up will be Group 5.
I'll leave the stage for you guys,
Group 5.
Group 5, are you guys here?
Yep, we're here.
OK.
Do you guys mind to turn on your cameras
perfectly?
You guys turn on here at cameras? Awesome.
Do you wanna share your your dacc?
Yeah, I can share it.
Perfect.
So you have Nathan, John and Aleema right.
Yeah.
Perfect.
OK.
Just kidding.
It's not letting me share.
Oh.
Can someone else try maybe?
Oh, is that the my permission?
Kind of thing. Gosh.
I yeah.
It came up with like a pop up saying that,
Yeah.
like,
I have to change my setting permissions
OK.
and it's not letting me do that.
Oh gosh.
Ah man, who can present everyone, he says.
Organizer. Everyone,
I I changed presenting who can present to
everyone.
I do not know why.
OK.
You know what?
Since I present for another group. Oh,
can someone present now? OK, perfect.
Yep, I got it.
OK, John, you got it. Perfect.
I'll set up the timer whenever you guys
are ready.
All right. I think we're ready. Yep.
Ready.
OK, perfect.
Let's go.
All right.
So hi everyone.
So today we're discussing our final
project,
which ours was a credit risk analysis
using the AI model that we built.
So we designed this project to tackle a
major issue in financial services,
which is how to better predict who will
default on a loan.
So then using machine learning,
we developed a tool that helps lenders
make smarter,
faster and fairer lending decisions.
And so today,
we're just gonna walk you through our
journey from the initial problem to the
building of.
The models and then to the insights that
we uncovered from it.
Yeah. So starting off with our overview,
traditional lending models often focus on
static indicators such as credit scores,
financial statements, income,
things like that.
But these models are severely outdated
and run the risk of misclassifying risky
borrowers and unnecessarily denying
applicants.
Two people with similar credit scores can
have very different risk profiles based
on their.
Spending habits,
financial resilience and family
responsibilities.
So our goal was to create a or develop.
A credit risk analysis model that
improves the accuracy and fairness.
In credit evaluations,
which would enhance predictive power and.
Ensure that the right people are getting
loans.
So why this matters in the US alone,
loan default cost financial institutions
billions of dollars each year.
So even a minor improvement would.
Even a minor improvement within the
default prediction accuracy could
translate to millions of dollars saved.
Additionally,
better models would open up lending
opportunities to populations that are
historically.
Underserved, such as young adults,
immigrants, people of color,
which would ultimately help businesses
grow and also the economy spur.
And then finally.
It would increase the value because
reduced defaults would lead to better
customer inclusivity.
And then also automating risk evaluation
cuts down on underwriting time and
operating costs, which also help.
The institution state of money.
Finally.
The business and financial relevant
accurate credit risk reduces loan default
rates as well as enhances fairness and
supports better customer experience and
compliance.
Through data-driven models,
there could be competitive advantages
through decision making and reduce manual
processing.
Yeah. So for our project,
we chose two sophisticated models,
which was gradient boosting and then
random forest.
And so for this project gradient boosting
it improved each subsequent model to
correct mistakes from the previous ones,
which made it highly accurate,
especially with the like real world data
that.
We were using,
which was initially very messy and had a
lot of gaps in it.
The random forest though.
That builds multiple decision trees and
averages them out.
So it offered a robust.
View of it and then resistance to
overfitting.
And then we used a logistic regression
served just serving as our baseline model,
and we did this because it's simple and
widely used in traditional finance,
but this lacks the power to capture
complex relationships.
So we thought it'd be a good baseline to
kind of compare with the other models.
And so for our data set we used kaggles.
Give me some credit competition,
which was specifically designed to
challenge credit risk modeling and so
this contained over 150,
000 anonymized participants,
which captured a realistic mix of
demographic and behavioral and financial
data points.
So some of these things include like the
number of dependents.
Outstanding debt, late payments,
income levels and more.
And so this just allowed us to construct
a more nuanced view of creditworthiness
and this data set was crucial because it
offered a blend of traditional and
alternative financial indicators.
So preparing our data,
the real world data always presented
challenges for us. Like I said,
we were missing values.
And so, if ignored,
those could distort the results.
So we carefully filled gaps using
statistical imputation like means for
numeric data and then modes for
categorical data.
We also conducted correlation analysis
and features that were almost perfectly
correlated, such as being late,
being 30 days late versus 60 days late.
Were selectively removed and that was
just to prevent redundancy.
And then lastly we address class
imbalance.
Defaults are rare,
but critical to predict.
And so if we didn't adjust for imbalance,
our models would just always predict no
default appearing accurate,
but being useless in practice, so.
So then,
while we were building the data after
cleaning the data and preprocessing it,
we scaled our features for consistency.
So this looks like.
Essential especially for logistic
regression.
We trained 3 models, the random forest,
the gradient boosting,
the logistic regression and to judge them
we didn't just look at accuracy,
we also focused on precision,
recall and F1 scores to measure how well
the models balance catching defaulters
versus like a false alarm.
And then using multiple evaluation
metrics gave us a much more honest and
well-rounded view of the model
performance overall.
So here are a few of our like metrics and
results.
So as you can see from the numbers,
both gradient boosting and random forest
models achieved outstanding accuracy.
Both were very close to 94%,
while the logistic regression.
Being much simpler,
it only achieved a 77 1/2% accuracy.
So this just reinforced that the
traditional methods are becoming less
reliable in modern lending.
However, accuracy isn't everything.
We understand that,
especially with rare events like default
metrics like precision and recall must
also be considered.
So this bar chart just visually captures
the huge gap between machine learning
models and traditional models.
And then even though logistic regression
is faster and easier,
its predictive power was significantly
weaker in this case.
So when lenders need to minimize
financial risk,
the small boost in accuracy gradient
boosting offers.
Can have a big financial impact.
Over thousands or even millions of loans
being issued.
So one powerful advantage of random
forest is that it ranks features by
importance.
So this was interesting because with
credit utilization or how much credit a
person uses compared to what's available
was the strongest predictor of default
risk. And then?
Features like late payments and high debt
to income ratios were following closely
and then age also emerged as a moderately
important with younger borrowers carrying
a slightly higher risk.
So these insights can just guide lenders
toward focusing on the right factors in
their underwriting processes.
And so some of the prototype outputs.
So after training our models,
we generated risk scores which were
predicted probabilities of default for
new applicants.
So as you can see,
most risk scores were very low between 0%
and 5% and most people indeed did not
default.
So this gives lenders actual insights
instead of a yes or no,
like binary choice,
they can see a spectrum of risk,
Thank you.
allowing for finer grain loan offers and
or credit limits based on individual risk.
And a dashboard like this can just help
speed up loan decision making, Dr.
So some of the challenges while we were
building this model challenges were
pretty frequent.
Like I've said,
the missing data was one of the most
major hurdles we had to go over ignoring
it or handling it poorly would have just
weakened the models and would have led to
a decreased accuracy.
So the imbalance between defaulters and
non defaulters also forced us to be
careful.
Otherwise the model would have just
predicted no default like I said.
And then additionally,
logistic regression initially failed.
To converge.
So we had to scale the data properly and
then tweak solver settings to fix this
issue.
So now moving into the next steps and
future improvements for our model and
risk analysis,
we understand that further iterations
could integrate more data factors.
We can include more models.
We can fine tune our random forests and
move our hyperparameters around.
We figured that hyper moving our
hyperameters around was very,
very important on our output and that
sometimes changing the maximum depth of
your tree or the number of estimators or
the minimum number of samples.
Had greatly changed the output.
That we were looking for and completely
changed what loans were worthy and what
weren't,
so keeping a fine eye on that was very
important to what we were doing and we
understand the future that we need to add
biased detection tools,
which I'll get to in a little.
Bit and we could explore different models
altogether instead of just tweaking the
models we have now,
we can look into AK nearest neighbors.
AK means we can do some.
Rather interesting things such as a
support vector.
Regressor and really just look around and
see what models get us the output or
looking for with the most efficiency and
accuracy.
So for risk assessment and mitigation,
we figure that we need to gather a
greater volume of structured data sets.
If we just work with one data set,
our information could be biased or skewed.
So when looking for those you really want
to get them from credit bureaus,
maybe from the international transaction
records or customer applications?
So a couple examples from that would be
maybe.
Going through Don and Brad Street,
if you wanna do a commercial loan or
someone of the biggest consumer credit
boroughs in the United States is Equifax.
We can look to those datasets as well.
To get a more nuanced idea of what's
going on with trends in the market,
and we should also increase the
extensiveness of data prepossi pre
processing as we were stating before,
that was like one of the biggest issues
when running our model was just making
sure the data.
Was fit to to for the model to run.
So we we should maybe create more outlier
detectors,
because sometimes a finger slips and
credit scores are entered in above 800,
which is impossible.
So we want to be looking out for stuff
like that or credit scores that are below
300.
So two different thresholds there.
So we want to be able to get those out of
our data to ensure a greater accuracy.
We could also create new hyperparameters
with the variables that we already have,
like a debt to income ratio that might
yield a better idea of what's going on
with debt and income.
They are correlated,
but there are a lot of different
scenarios when people enter debt and it's
better to get a understanding of why that
is.
And then moving on to the next slide,
we could also do some risk mitigation by
including the train test split with our
models.
Machine learning tends to memorize,
especially if used over and over and over
again.
So putting something there as a benchmark
to make sure that the data isn't just
regurgitating old information and
actually predicting something using the
trends that we're getting from the
hyperparameters.
The models useless if it's not able to
have any predictive accuracy.
Multiple models with different targets
may also yield increased understandings
to us by moving those targets around,
we can test each variable and see what
has the greatest influence individually,
and that will yield a better.
Variable pool for us to use when we run
the actual model in the end.
It highlights that a single unchecked
model can get stuck.
Only learning and memorizing in that
really covering the bases and being
extensive in your report is almost
necessary.
Jerry.
So for key learnings kind of as a
conclusive, some conclusive points,
data cleaning was very critical.
There was a lot of missing values.
There's outliers. If that isn't done,
then your your model is basically useless.
It's not going to be accurate.
You're going to be giving loans to the
wrong people or denying people who are
worthy loans, which is just as bad.
You're losing business.
Hyperparameter tuning,
like greatly improved performance and
just moving things around and not being
satisfied with just one,
one target and 1:00.
Output.
Will ensure that you make the most money
and avoid the most risk in collaborating
with the code made problem solving way
more,
way more fast and it was much more
creative.
I I feel our model is a lot more nuanced
and it could have benefit was just one
person,
especially when running into tiny errors.
It's nice to have multiple people look it
over.
You want to cover or each person might
have the one missing piece that you need.
For your code to finally run.
And that made all the difference.
Within this project.
Perfect.
I love your project.
OK, let me set up like 5 minutes Q&A.
Any questions folks?
As usual, like people do have,
do not have a question, I have questions.
That's a quick, quick question.
OK, #1 questions based upon your data.
Do you consider there there is a year
over year difference?
Because if you train this model on,
for example 2009 data,
so that will be totally different than,
you know 2019 data just because you know
just we have we just had a financial
crisis in the 2008 and also like if you
train.
A model in the 2020 we just had COVID.
So then the default kind of information
gonna be totally different.
Did you guys consider that kind of factor?
Uh, in your model?
So we kind of didn't kind of did the data
span over a very large portion of time.
So we weren't looking at any data from
like a like a two year period.
OK.
It was like 20 years worth of data,
so we kind of figured that that would
OK.
implement the the changing trends over
time and kind of with our next steps we I
Uh.
OK.
included Equifax in my description of
like credit boroughs we can use because
they're gonna give us real.
Time credit scores.
Like FICO scores and credit reports year
over year.
So that that is always gonna be coming in
and that can be implemented in the model
over time.
So it's allowed to learn and change.
Ah, I see.
OK. And also the this, this,
this project remind me one of my friends
who's who used to work for the federal
government and then she's trying to build
her startup.
So you know,
in the US there is a there is a unique
issue is a healthcare there is there are
some people, right.
So then they got sick.
They they likely they just go broke.
So then my question is,
you know for some people.
Were sick and it's sort of like at the.
Charge of being broke.
How how do you guys use your model to
determine who of those people you want to
give the second chance to give them some
money?
Knowing that default risk is relatively
high?
How do you use that model to to determine
those people?
The different groups.
We could make people in that that fall in
that class the target variable and then
run that against all the other inputs and
see which inputs are common,
which ones aren't,
and then run kind of a background check
around those things.
See why that is what's going on.
Hi.
Financially and based off of that,
we could make that decision.
I kind of think that's more of a special
case and would require a little bit more
attention.
Yeah. Yeah, certainly.
Because her point is from an education
perspective, because those are the people.
Usually, if their income is even lower.
And then they took a lot of money,
you know,
to do the healthcare and then likely they
do not even have any insurance.
So if they got sick for any member of
their family,
so then just pretty much like broke.
So then not a lot of programming programs
that are still available to help them
understand that the risks of paying back
money.
In real monthly cadence.
So that and and a financial institute
usually just sort of call on call.
Ignore them without borrowing them
anymore.
Money for them to start again.
So that's really a, a,
a social risk right now.
OK, perfect.
So basically your answer is let's just
grab the data and you run a special model
on those folks and then to understand who
are having a bigger risk and who are
having a smaller risk, OK.
Perfect question.
#3 have you guys run this model on your
own data?
Do you guys have a higher risk of a
default, meaning your yourself?
Oh,
I haven't ran in against my own crowd yet.
OK, OK. So sounds good.
All right.
Thank you so much.
Good, good, good, good, good stuff.
Thank you.
All right. We are going to.
Group One.
OK.
You know what?
Yeah.
Where it doesn't, there you go.
OK, so you have a recording.
I.
I I remember that.
Yeah.
OK, perfect.
Let me set up the time. Are Are you ready?
Are you ready to present Haroon and and
also that recording? OK,
Yeah.
so let me perfect go.
To be on your on mute.
I think you're on your, yeah.
Sorry.
So far our data sources we used available
data sets on Kegel and it was the
cryptocurrency data set which included
financial data on Bitcoin and Ethereum
and it was posted by Rahul Singh.
So we had a fiber focus as they talked
about.
So we focused from 2018 to 2023 and our
original data set was pretty simplistic.
It had the open the high, the low.
Close, close and just.
They were filtered out through by the
currency type.
So it was either Ethereum or Bitcoin.
We didn't focus on whole a whole lot on
other currencies because there is a
reliability issue there.
And I I believe Ethereum and Bitcoin have
the highest market share when it comes to
cryptocurrencies.
So as I mentioned,
it was a simplistic data set.
So we did some,
we added some technical indicators.
Using Python. So we added the RSI,
the MACD signal, signal line, EMA 20,
Bollinger bands and obv.
So if someone's unfamiliar with trading
some,
these are some examples of what a bullish
market looks like.
And what a bearish market looks like for?
All right,
so here's a snapshot of what our new data
set looks like after doing the adding in
the technical indicators,
you might see that there are some missing
data sets,
but in order to calculate those you need
some prior data. So that's why.
RSI starts after a week,
a week of data and EMA and the Bollinger
Band Start.
After almost close to two weeks of data
there.
So before we dive into our results and
what we found,
I just wanted to place a disclaimer
because we're only analyzing data from
2018 to 2023.
So the results are no longer relevant and
in current market in the current
situation in the world where there.
A tariff going.
A tariff war going on.
It's highly unpredictable to determine
how the trends within the crypto market.
Are going to be because when government
when.
Trust in government is low. You see,
there's a high,
high shift within the crypto markets as
well.
So for our pre processings we.
Use the mean for of throughout the
columns to fill in those missing a
datasets because we didn't want to lose
those precious data points because we're
only analyzing data for five years.
While it may seem a lot, but,
but all the data we want it to be as.
Realistic as possible.
So we used used mean to fill out all the
missing data sets.
Then we split our data set into two.
SO12 individually focus on Ethereum and
the other two individually focus on
Bitcoin. Additionally, we also.
Also use KK Fold cross validation with RK
being set to 5.
We we chose to use K Fold cross
validation because we wanted wanted to
have a reliable model and we didn't want
our results to be based out of chance or
based out of how the data set was
randomly split.
And we did a 707015 and 15 data split
where 70 was for training,
15 to test and the other 15 to validate
our findings, our models.
Oh, is it not possible to move this?
Is it all right if I stop sharing my
screen and reshare it using PowerPoint?
Well, I don't.
I don't seem like I can move the.
Yeah, totally.
Yeah,
when I download your your slides in the
afternoon, I was like, OK.
Is this a surprise or something?
Yeah, go ahead.
Sorry.
Let's see.
Share.
Can you guys see my screen?
Yep.
Perfect.
This is a you guys already seen it,
so doesn't really matter to show it again,
but it's a meme about doing K fold cross
validation for models.
OK.
Right.
For our techniques,
we did logistic regression because it's a
simple model,
it's lightweight and we could use it as
our baseline to compare our findings with
random forests,
we chose random forest for its complexity
and its ability to capture non linear
relationships.
So there were four models in total,
22 for Ethereum, 2 for Bitcoin one.
Logistic regression and one random forest
or target variable was a binary.
Classification.
So we wanted to predict whether the next
closing days price would be higher or
lower to the current days closing price.
And we did K fold set to five and for our
evaluation we aggregated all the results
from the 55 versions and then did our did.
Our analysis on those and we also hyper
tuned the both our random forest models
and our.
Logistic regression models as well.
And it took a long time.
It took almost 20 minutes just to run all
the models together.
All right, Paul.
Pass it over to Noah then.
All right.
My bad, sorry.
No, it's alright.
Yeah.
So just quick summary of the results here.
You can see the confusion matrixes on the
screen.
These are the models that didn't have any
Piper parameter tuning.
You can see the clear difference there
between.
The accuracy of the logistic regression
models for Bitcoin and Ethereum on top
versus the accuracy of the random forest
models almost A10 percentage point
difference.
Hmm.
For Ethereum in seven for.
No.
It wasn't me.
I'm not sure what happened to our
presentation, but I can.
I can try to get it up on my screen.
But something happened all right.
All right.
Can you guys see my screen?
Yep.
OK, cool.
All right. So going on to the next slide.
These are the hyper tune models.
Very similar in terms of accuracy,
there was a slight accuracy improvement
for the Ethereum Brandon Forest model or
a slight decrease.
Slight increase for the Bitcoin random
forest model.
Logistic regression still struggled.
You can see here, even for the Bitcoin,
it only predicted.
All price increases.
Every single time.
So not very useful and just kinda further
supports the random forest.
So a quick summary of our key takeaways.
Random Forest obviously outperforms
linear regression.
Linear regression struggled quite a bit
with Bitcoin as you just saw.
For us,
hyper tuning did little to improve their
performance.
And our Top Model achievement accuracy of
62%.
So while somewhat impressive for a highly
volatile.
Currency we self out there is a lot of
improvements that we can make to to make
it better.
So talk about those improvements
introducing more complex indicators like
technical indicator crossovers,
which we calculated when those indicators
cross certain thresholds across each
other,
could be introduced as indicators using
Candlestick patterns or rolling
statistics.
Those are all things that could be
calculated using this data set.
We also could look to introduce outside
variables that are affecting the prices
like measure of stock market sentiment or
performance of correlated securities.
It's often said that Bitcoin and Ethereum
sometimes tend to track the performance
of the NASDAQ or other tech stocks,
and then as well as create an indicator
dashboard.
So this would make it more interactive.
And allow you to see the movement of the
indicators.
In real time.
As far as how we would scale our solution
as Sufyan talked about before,
the data quality get switching from daily
to hourly or minute data could improve it
as well as some sort of API integration
to get real time data.
We could look at multi user access
turning.
The notebook into a web app hosted in the
cloud.
And then in terms of financial strategy,
back testing it on a paper trading
platform to see how it would have done
over the past few years and compare that.
To like a benchmark like a treasury.
All right, quick reflection here.
Random forest. You know,
we we found that to be better.
We found Python to be powerful to
calculate the key metrics we originally
were going to use Excel to do that,
and Python made it a lot quicker and then
just being patient, as Sufyan mentioned,
took us a while to train.
Very iterative process.
The code doing the coding and then just
be keeping attention to detail.
A product.
Me going around folks, any question?
Alright, questions.
What are the most important features?
I don't know if you wanna take that one.
All right.
So.
He was more of the data.
All right, I'll take this one.
I saw Bollinger Band was was the biggest
one and then followed EMA EMA 50.
Oh yeah, maybe 50, OK.
The Emffe and the Bollinger bands were
highly correlated because we I believe it
also did a feature analysis.
It's been a long time since we did this
project, so.
Using the feature.
From random Forest,
we learned those are the two that were
highly involved in predicting being
predicting the next closing days price
for Bitcoin and Ethereum.
OK.
So then you said your your team has your
team has done some fine tuning kind of
work.
Is it a great search?
Kind of fine tuning or you you're OK.
So great search.
Spread search.
So why the great search help one?
Crypto, not the other one.
Any,
any any reason behind it behind the
scenes or any any thought?
Interesting question.
So we never.
Anticipated this question but are on the
top of my head, I would say.
It's because the volume in Bitcoin was
much higher compared to Ethereum is
probably my guess.
Why hyper tuning hub?
The Bitcoin models to do outperform.
Improvement and compare to the Ethereum
models.
Got it.
And then you said you have a 70701515
kind of split, right?
So then it is a random splitting or it is
it is a?
It is a splitting by chronological order.
It's random swelling.
Also, the random sleeping OK,
so the technically.
Yeah.
You may be grouping some of the Today
data and the five year old data kind of
together and then that's OK.
Gotcha. OK.
Last question,
if if I ask you guys each of you,
it was $1000 based upon your results or
how?
How big is your confidence on doing that?
I.
I mean,
personally I would say I I wouldn't be
No.
very confident in it, especially with.
Everything going on with crypto right now,
it's just.
Oh, OK, OK.
So unpredictable.
Given I I,
I tend to see crypto as something that
just essentially tracks the NASDAQ more
or less.
So I would rather just put my money in
company that's actually generated value,
But you have a 62% accuracy, Noah.
but.
62% that's better than.
That's better than a fairy gambling,
right?
Already better than that.
That's that's true.
I mean, yeah,
I have no problem spending 1000 when I go
All right.
to poto.
So just get in but.
OK, sounds good. Thank you guys.
Fantastic work.
Group 3.
Hey.
No.
One second.
See.
I'm just pulling up our presentation here.
Perfect.
Oh, nice to see you guys again.
I mean, second time in this class.
I know it's a weird to say that,
but yes it is.
Yeah,
just let me know whenever you're ready.
So I already set up timer timer so
alright.
All right.
Can you see this?
Yeah, I can see this.
Ready. Ready to go.
Yep.
OK, perfect.
Let's go.
Right.
So we are Group 3 and our presentation,
we're going to be analyzing the
relationship between consumer spending
and purchasing methods.
Sam,
Matt and myself are the three team
members of our group today.
So we're gonna walk through the agenda
that you laid out for us to go.
So I'll be going over the project
overview and the business and financial
relevance portion of the presentation.
Sam is going to be talking about the ML
and AI techniques that we use along with
the data sources and processing.
And then Matt is gonna walk through some
of our results as well as next steps in
future improvements and then I'll talk
about our team reflection slide at the
end as well.
So for our project overview kind of our
problem statement is really how different
consumer purchasing locations impact the
amount spent per transaction.
And so the three that we looked at were
when people are making purchases in store
versus online versus in an app and if
those kind of.
Locations impact how much a user or a
person is spending.
The situation is important because it can
help instruct businesses where to invest
those resources to influence that
purchasing behavior.
It's really relevant to Business Today
because purchasing behavior is always
changing.
Obviously with the recent developments of
e-commerce and mobile apps that have
altered purchasing behavior significantly
over the last decade,
there's a lot more options for people to
buy things today.
So we wanted to explore the relationship
that this has and if like someone is
shopping in an app on like Instagram or
Tiktok,
if they're spending more money than if
they would be going in store or something
like that for the same types of goods.
And purchases.
And the scope that were we went through
for the project is number one we analyzed
and identify a data set with 10,
000 transactions documenting purchase
location,
amount spent and purchase category.
There were some other things within the
data as well that weren't super relevant
for our for our problem here.
So we kind of ignored some of that or
cleaned it up before we used it.
Then obviously we applied the ML and AI
methods that we learned about in class to
detect patterns and identify the
relationship between.
And those purchasing methods and then
finally evaluated the model's performance
using metrics like MSE and then like I
mentioned,
we'll talk about kind of feature
applications for this as well.
But just to recap,
kind of the things that we're looking at
is how the different purchasing locations
for mobile app in store and online
mattered in terms of how much a consumer
is spending.
For the business and financial relevance.
So why this is important is because the
purchasing experience is rapidly evolving
and consumer behavior is constantly
changing.
If you think before kind of like
computers and stuff like that existed,
everyone was shopping in brick and mortar
locations,
even pre COVID that was really kind of
popular and.
Just using things like cash, check,
credit cards and stuff like that.
But now we have so many different ways to
go shopping today.
Through ecommerce,
mobile apps and even social media,
so businesses need to understand.
And how they can really benefit from this?
They can adapt their marketing strategies.
Learn how they can better allocate their
resources in terms of.
Marketing campaigns and things like that.
And maximize their revenue as well.
So the businesses that can weaponize this
most effectively will be the best set up
for financial success in the future.
It also provides a lot of decision making
value for those businesses by
understanding profitability in different
spending behaviors by again kind of
understanding where it makes the most
sense to focus.
Enable data-driven investment decisions,
allowing company resources to be spent
more tactfully and giving more detailed
investment rather than just kind of
peanut butter spreading or across all of
their different platforms and eliminating
some of that guesswork.
So allowing them to be more tactical with
where they're invest.
Those resources and then be more
impactful with those targeting strategies
and marketing,
advertising investments like I mentioned
previously.
And then finally,
for the operational impact really.
Allows businesses to allocate resources
towards those higher conversion platforms,
especially based on the different product
category that those companies are serving.
Can really help increase operational
efficiency in that way.
Help inform technology development.
So if companies should be investing more
resources into their website versus maybe
into their mobile app or some of their
social media platforms identifying where
they can better spend those dollars in
resources and where they need to spend
more time developing that specific
technology.
And finally,
tailing those promotional strategies
based on purchasing location.
So helping build stronger customer
loyalty.
And earning more repeat customers by
better targeting them and and making them
more happy with their purchase and
getting them to come back and purchase
through that same Ave. again over time.
All right,
so getting into the models we used for
this project,
we started with linear regression because
it's basic and widely used,
and we use that to predict total spend by
location.
Matt will get into all the specific
results for the models later in the
slides, but it wasn't very accurate.
And then we moved on to utilizing K means
clustering.
We decided on our clusters using the
elbow method and the silhouette score.
And then we use that to just find any
connections whatsoever between data
points.
And then after using the K means
clustering,
we step it up to a regression tree and
this time we switched up our prediction a
little bit and chose to predict location
based on amount spent and category,
and then after the using the regression
tree, we went to the.
I would say the most useful form of model
we use, which is the random forest.
And then we use that to predict location
again based on amount spent in category
and our whole philosophy with adding
these different models into the project
was as we learned in class,
the new models more accurate,
we decided to implement them towards this
project to hopefully come up.
With a more accurate model.
Our data set we chose was a Kaggle data
set. It had 10,
000 data points and each data point
included a customer Ida category of the
item which they bought the item itself.
The quantity of items, the price per unit,
and then the total spend and then it.
Also included the specific payment method
they use,
such as a credit card or an online wallet,
and then it also included the location of
purchase,
the in store mobile app or online.
And then it also includ.
Transaction date.
We decided that variables like customer
ID,
quantity and transaction date were not
gonna help us predict anything.
So we just decided to use category total
spent and location.
With the data we had quite a few
challenges and limitations and the
biggest one was just an overall lack of
trends within the data.
There's in this box and whisker plot on
the right,
we can kind of see that mobile app is in
blue in store in orange.
And online in green.
And there's really not a lot of variation
between the data,
which made it difficult to glean any.
Predictions.
And then we also determine that our data
set was potentially not a very accurate
representation of real world purchases.
One example of that was a car purchase
where somebody ordered 5 vehicles online
through their phone totaling about a
quarter $1,000,000.
And we decided that that was probably an
unlikely real world transaction.
And then the other thing was just a
limited number of purchase locations made
differentiation.
In between the three difficult in store,
mobile app and online.
While they are different,
we assume there could be a little bit of
crossover in terms of people shopping
that way and then to kinda help with some
of these challenges and limitations,
we use some ordinal encoding to take some
categorical variables and make them into
numerical to hope.
Get a little better differentiation and
then we remove some outliers like the
five car online purchase because.
We felt that those wouldn't give us any
accurate predictions at all.
OK.
So moving on to the results,
first thing we tried,
like Sam said was a linear regression to
predict price from location of purchase.
So we ordinarily coated location 012 as
you can see it's it's not accurate at all
because looking at the data,
it seems that there's no correlation
between spend and location.
We tried again with just the housing and
utility category because put a quick
glance it seemed.
That might be a little less.
Only spread,
but still the analysis didn't really seem
worthwhile there.
So then we moved on to the K means.
Took a step back and tried to find any
different relationships that might have
been harder to see.
We use K means clustering to have AI
generate those relationships for us.
So the four variables we included in the
analysis were total spend location,
category of purchase and purchase method
since these ones were the ones we thought
might be useful.
To our project proposal,
we determined to generate four of these
by using the elbow method in Silhouette
score.
The clustering, however,
seemed to be mostly driven by cost.
So category 9,
which is the generic shopping category,
had a lot of high-priced items in it.
And that weren't outliers.
So we did separate the outliers using the
inner quartile range,
but still a lot of them were in there
since they're a high quantity of of
high-priced items.
And though that category split off into
three separate clusters,
with only about 50 to 80 data points,
and then the remaining 9800 data points
were clustered into the first one.
So I think it, you know,
we did learn that there was some
correlation between category and total
spend.
But as you can see the the mean of the
location.
Is pretty much one across the board,
so there was no correlation that the
clustering.
Figured out with regards to location.
Nonetheless,
so we at this point we pretty much knew
that our data.
Wasn't really gonna yield good results,
but we still went forward and and tried a
regression tree.
This tree was set up to predict location
of purchase,
given the total spend and category.
And then we had to clip the predictions
to only return 01 and two,
which were our three location types.
Tree model was set to a Max depth of 10.
We can see here as expected,
the model did not.
Perform very well.
Pretty much guest location one the entire
time.
We did adjust the Max depth up and down
to see if that changed anything and
actually reducing the depth down to two
improved it by a little bit,
but really not anything significant.
But then we said, you know,
might as well try a random forest could
give increased accuracy.
We knew it wouldn't since the data didn't
seem to have any trends.
But we did try random forest 100 trees.
MSC went down.
MSC went down a little bit,
thought maybe it was just predicting 1
due to averaging over time and and there
was no real trend to pick up.
But yeah,
still not an effective model for this
data set.
So moving into next steps conclusion,
you know we created a framework with
multiple models that we thought will work
given a correct data set.
But we said our our data didn't really
reflect real life,
think it might have been,
you know generated on Kaggle just to have
a.
Data set and so we didn't get any
meaningful correlation between the
variables we tested.
To improve, obviously find real data.
We we did try and find some other sets on
Kaggle but they all seem to be.
Kind of similarly,
just procedurally generated,
maybe with other specific variables in
mind to target, but nothing with location.
And then after we do find that data,
you know,
redevelop the decision tree model and
actually be able to tune it in more,
maybe using boosting bootstrapping if we
can only get a little bit of data to help
with that and then.
Further down the line,
once we get a good decision tree model,
we also.
You know,
would like to implement ALM to develop
personalized marketing content to users
based on their spending habits.
So pulling in this data and being able to
push it out to their correct location to
generate more business that way.
Yeah. So really kind of what we learned.
Obviously we hit on it,
but your models can only be good as good
as the data set that we're using.
So there is a a few problems that Matt
outlined with the set that we had.
It wasn't accurately representing
probably some real life data and was
pretty much just kind of an average
across the entire set.
Additional models can be used to double
check initial performance though,
so that was something that we learned as
we continued to try new models.
The fact that we were getting kind of the
same answers by all of them.
Gave us a good sign that we were kind of
running the model accurately.
We just had bad data to run them with and
then.
Like one of the other groups mentioned
earlier,
like cleaning the data is really
important to get that right before
starting the analysis,
because then you're just gonna have to go
back and do that eventually. Later.
If you start too early without going
through and cleaning that. So just.
Other kind of key takeaways that we had
together as a team,
we found that it was difficult to analyze
model performance when using that bad
data.
Our errors were really so high that it
was hard.
It was hard to determine if the model was
actually broken or if there was no real
correlation,
but the fact that we kept kind of
checking.
Against different models.
Kinda showed us that there wasn't a
correlation between the two and that we
were running it accurately and then just
in general it can be hard to find good
data.
So we kinda hypothesized that's really
why companies are focusing so much on
using AI to kind of generate and protect
their own data and to not make that
publicly available because it is so
important and critical to help run these
effective models.
When you do have good data.
Are there any questions?
Oh, right.
Oh, OK, I I honestly,
I I do love your presentation.
It's it's pretty, pretty cool.
You know,
sometimes you prove it works and and the
same it has the same value to, you know,
improve it doesn't work.
So I I totally love love this
presentation. Just one quick question.
Before you,
you you guys started this analysis,
what was your expectation?
What kind of initial results?
What you were hoping to to achieve?
I'd I'd say the main result we were
hoping is you could run like all this
data through to generate a model that
would split a purchase either by category
or spend or both into different locations.
And then if you're company could use that
data to understand like who?
To target. Like what? What?
What locations are targeting?
What categories or what?
Amount of spend so we can better use that
to market.
To our customers.
I see. So. So yeah, go ahead.
I think I was just going to say kind of
like a hypothesis that we kind of set out
at the beginning was that an online
purchase probably occurs more frequently,
but at potentially like lower.
Priced items,
but like an in store purchase for the
same type of spend could be a less
frequent purchase,
but consumers are spending more in those
times that they go into the stores.
Right.
So then now that was your hypothesis,
right?
So then based upon the result that you
guys currently have,
can you say you prove or disprove your
hypothesis?
Based on the data set that we have,
I think we would say that our hypothesis
was disproven and that there really isn't
a correlation between location and amount
spent.
But I think if we analyzed it on other
data that was potentially more applicable
to real life or was more relevant and
representative,
I think it could potentially show
different results.
Right. So, Ben,
I I you guys may have mentioned,
so I I may have missed.
So is there any time dimension in your
data that you're focusing on,
for example like 10 year worth of data or
or three-year worth of data?
Because if you're focusing on like
three-year worth of data like post COVID,
I think maybe there is some correlation
that people spending more money online
versus in the brick mortar stores.
But if you are saying that,
that's just generalized.
Example 25 year or ten year verse of data
in a post COVID only a proportion of this
data.
So then it may maybe you know the effort
may be discounted.
I just do not know like the time frame of
of the data that you are using to analyze.
Yeah, I don't remember.
Matt and Sam,
do you remember if it gave like dates and
times of? I know it was in the data,
but I don't remember what the time frame
was.
I think it was more of like a point of
purchase time in the day and not a like a
Sorry.
You know her?
actual date spread out.
I I think our our data was dating around
like 2023 to 2025 S 2,
two to three years back, yeah.
Oh.
Oh, OK, so so meaning that.
Yes,
so post COVID and people not you cannot
differentiate like people shopping from
different locations, OK.
So good insight.
Correct. Yeah.
It's good inside. OK,
so based upon the result,
which stock should I short sell?
OK. Perfect. Abigail.
I don't know if I'm touching anything
right now.
OK, so perfect.
Fantastic.
Thank you so much for the presentation.
OK, I think.
Let's just take a break.
Let's just come back, regroup at 7:10.
So then we just, you know,
one one minute last for the break.
So then we can just keep continue our
presentations. OK,
after break the first group will present
will be group 10, OK.
So then at 7:10.
So then maybe you guys wanna have your
start share your screen,
have your deck ready. OK.
So I will see you back at 7:10.
OK.
Welcome back.
I think Group 10.
Your turn.
Alrighty.
Perfect.
Kaitlyn, I think you are on mute.
There we go. OK.
So for our final project,
we decided to focus on dynamic portfolio
optimization.
Portfolio optimization has been a
constant problem in finance for both
large scale companies and small traders
and is the process in which investors
allocate their assets to maximize return
while minimizing risk taken on.
The problem?
We decided to focus on was that
traditional portfolio optimization
techniques such as CAPM and mean variance
optimization operate under the assumption
of static market conditions and require
investors to specify risk return
preferences in advance.
These methods often struggle to perform
when faced with the complexities of real
world.
Markets.
In reality,
financial markets are highly dynamic.
Asset prices,
volatilities and correlation change
continuously.
So static models are not suited to
respond to these fluctuations,
leading to sub optimal asset allocations
over time.
So to bridge this gap,
our project proposes a development of a
reinforcement learning agent capable of
learning portfolio allocation strategies
directly through interaction with market
data.
Instead of relying on fixed assumptions,
the real agent will continuously adapt
its portfolio decisions based on evolving
market conditions,
aiming to maximize returns while managing
risk dynamically.
So I'll start with talking why dynamic
portfolio optimization matters in the
real world. First off,
markets today aren't stationary.
They can swing between bull runs,
crashes and sideways trends,
and along with that the traditional mean
variance frameworks in CAPM assume you
pick a risk return,
trade off one time and stick with it.
But when volatility shifts,
maybe during a crash or something,
those allocations will lag or.
Can suffer large drawdowns.
Second,
this underperformance has real
consequences for investors.
Institutional managers face a lot of
pressure if their portfolios fall behind
benchmarks.
Retail investors that are chasing higher
yields or a smoother ride want strategies
that adapt in real time to change along
with market conditions.
And so our our approach aims to deliver
superior risk adjusted returns across the
board.
And finally,
the adaptability that the that
adaptability becomes a competitive edge.
By using an AI agent that rebalances on
the fly and identifies short term trading
opportunities,
you can both capture the upside swings
and then also protect yourself from any
drawdowns. And then in practical terms,
it means it's more consistent growth of
assets under management and a more subst.
Track record.
During both bull and bearish markets.
And go to the next one and then.
So now we'll look at the engine behind
our strategy,
which is the AI techniques that we're
using.
We use two reinforcement learning agents.
One is dqn.
The other is PPO.
The Dqn treats portfolio allocation as a
action problem.
And it chooses from a set of predefined
allocation ratios.
It learns aq value for each choice by
simulating market steps and then updating
its policy.
The PPO.
Which uses a continuous action space and
more stable policy grading updates.
It clips the ratio of nude old
probabilities to keep the training from
diverging.
And this is really useful in like noisy
financial environments.
And I forgot to say,
dqn is stands for Deep Queue network and
then ppo's proximal policy optimization.
And then to know if our agents are
actually adding value,
we compare them against 3 baselines.
The first is the buy and hold which just
invests and never rebalances.
Which is an easy benchmark to be in
volatile times.
And then we have equal weighted portfolio
which rebalances daily to maintain equal
exposure across assets.
And then the risk parity model which
allocates based on each asset's
volatility.
That's another interesting but rule based
approach.
And then we labor,
we layer in the hybrid approach using the
traditional machine learning to
preprocess our inputs and that helps us
reduce noise and stabilize the learning
curves and it also.
Prevents unwanted policy out dates during
any outlier events.
All right. So for our project,
we used financial data,
financial data coming from Cagle,
specifically focusing on Yahoo finance,
imported data and historical prices over
the last five years of the daily data on
the S&P 500 stocks.
And including in this information were
the stock prices, trading volume,
interest rates and other market
indicators that could help our model
understand how the market moves.
So first we had to pre process.
Handling any missing missing information,
organizing it so it was consistent and
narrowing it down to the most important.
Is it it just only me or?
Now I I see that too.
It was lagging a little bit.
What's going on?
You just lagged for a bit.
I'm sorry.
I hear chillin.
Well, I guess I'll backtrack a little bit,
but.
Just as I was talking about how we had to
preprocess our data and it was a very
important step just because if the data
isn't clean,
the model doesn't learn properly.
But with this came issues as it's such a
big data set.
Trying to clean it gave us a lot of
errors and just kind of struggles down
the stretch.
And then kind of moving on to other
issues that we really ran into was.
During the reinforcement learning
environment setup.
Just the amount of time and effort that
that took to run all this data through a
reinforcement learning environment.
You can imagine how how long you know
kind of have an AI model function with.
Buy and selling and holding and
relearning and putting information,
storing it and everything like that.
So when you do run into issues,
it does take quite a while to try to
troubleshoot that.
And then another big issue that we faced
was we didn't have access to full live
data in real time stock market data,
which is definitely something that we
want to look forward to using in the
future with this model just because only
focusing on historic CS can be.
Efficient,
but if the model can run with real time
data,
then it's really going to function at the
most efficient way possible.
Yeah, you can go to the next slide.
So here is kind of a little bit of our
code.
So just going through it,
we loaded our data in and then tried to,
you know,
handle and fill any missing values by
using.
The.
Last known value in stripping any columns
of any words that just not confuse the AI
model.
And then we also did a little bit of
scaling.
So we use the min Max scaler as well to
make it easier for the AI to learn.
Just you know,
if all the numbers are on the same level.
And then you can go to the next slide.
And this one is how we started building
our custom environment for the.
Reinforcement learning and we named it
our portfolio environment and so
basically in this world,
it's where the AI starts with.
We gave it a fake $100,
000 and it can choose to either buy,
sell or hold these stocks.
Each step it takes,
it looks at the stock market data we gave
it and it kind of makes a choice based on
that and will receive either points based
on how well it does or how bad it does
based on either buying or selling.
And then as a.
Hold it kind of has a flat rate of,
you know, a good job, a good point.
Then we also added a reset function so we
could restart the environment at any time
and try to train the AI as many times
from the beginning,
just so it wasn't running one time
through.
And then yeah,
so I don't think we have a picture of it,
but basically the AII in this model can
choose between a sell holder by zero
being sell,
hold being one and two being by.
So if it chooses to sell.
And it.
And it wins its money.
Then it gets a small reward.
As I said earlier.
And then if it chooses to buy and it wins
its money, then it gets a small role.
There's a well,
but it can't get punished as a buys
incorrectly.
And then.
Here is where we created evaluation tools
to measure how well the AI is doing.
So we created the calculate RMSE function
which basically just looks at how close
the Ai's prediction are compared to the
real data.
And basically we were looking to see if
we function with a lower RMSE,
which means that we had better
predictions just based on how to optimize
this portfolio.
Dynamically and then we did the calculate
Sharpe ratio,
which basically looked at the returns and
the risk free rate of .
Good morning.
01 and basically taking this into account,
we wanted to find a higher Sharpe ratio
based on our mild on our model,
which just kind of conc.
That it's smarter investing and then we
also decided to calculate volatility and
this just measures how the portfolio
bounces up and down.
Obviously for this model,
we're looking for lower volatility.
Just meaning that it's smoother and safer
performance.
All right.
And then I'll go into the next steps and
future improvements that we have.
As we mentioned a little bit before,
we want to put a lot of emphasis on focus
on reinforcement learning.
We would also want to finalize data,
analyze results,
strengthen baseline comparisons and
overall just EN.
The model that we created,
whether that's adding more years to it or
making sure there's no holes in it,
basically all these next steps we have
are things that would just come with more
time working on the model.
And and working together to make it the
best it could become.
And then lastly, for our team reflection.
What we learned was the first thing we
learned was the complexity of the market.
Obviously it's it's an ever changing
market and it's it can be very hard to
predict.
So that's kind of what this whole project
was about.
And the importance of data reprocessing,
which we talked about and then our
biggest takeaways were communication is
key.
We found that we worked really well
together when we communicated efficiently
and when we didn't.
It proved to be a difficult.
Project and then that success metrics
matter in this project.
Like we just talked about the Sharpe
ratio volatility,
all those things really became a big
factor here.
And that is any questions?
Yeah, I I appreciate that you.
You brought up applying that
communication is key. So totally right.
So then as a for As for a team, right?
So then you need to communicate with each
other.
So what?
What's the results?
So what?
What's the result in terms of ROI that
you're your reinforcement model versus
the other three benchmarks?
So actually we haven't been able to fully
get results yet for this,
just as we've been running it,
we kinda have more of a prototype as of
I see.
now just with the reinforcement learning
environment.
OK.
It's just been taking a lot of time and
we're all busy with a lot of other stuff
going on.
That's why we kind of said,
talked about communication just down the
stretch here.
We thought we would finish it up in time,
but didn't actually get to,
but we know that with these outputs.
OK.
And everything in the future that we'll
have it done and it should give us a good
idea just based on.
How much we put into this that we'll have
some good results.
Yeah, do.
Do you think that by May the 5th you guys
can have some result that in the final
project paper like just one? Oh OK.
Yes. Yeah, will.
Yeah.
Yeah,
we're definitely planning on having that
all done by then wrapped up.
OK, OK.
That's it's a very interesting idea.
And then I I believe a lot of people are
doing this.
So then I believe your your project has
much good good future.
You know,
since you don't have any results.
So that's fine because 11 next question
I'm I'm about to ask is if you just use a
random random number generator, right?
So then just you have a 01/2,
I just use that random number to generate
like my decision whether I'm going to buy
more.
Or I just sell all?
So then I wonder if that reinforcement
kind of learning algorithm will be that
kind of decision making kind of algorithm,
because I I.
I guess we, yeah,
we we would hope that it.
Right, right. So.
But I think we're getting there.
We're getting there with it, so yeah.
OK, OK. I I'm just curious, right?
Because I I read one paper or something
that they are.
Yeah,
there are some random guessing method and
then they they they be the market,
which is kind of interesting because you
already have the framework set up and
then you have like run them run number
generator.
So to make the decision randomly I just
wanna.
I just really curious if if these are
real kind of algorithm could be that.
Decision making head of method.
I'm pretty sure he will just want to know
like how big the difference it will be.
Yeah,
that definitely would be something
interesting to look at.
Yeah, but pretty, pretty cool.
Pretty cool.
Thank you so much for for your
presentation. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you.
Yep. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Awesome. Yeah.
OK. Next one, group six. Oh well.
OK.
Hey everyone I'm Adrix joined by Willy
today.
We'll walk you through a neural network
approach to predicting industrial loan
defaults,
primarily used small business admin loan
data,
economic indicators and credit variables.
Awesome. So I'll kick it off here so.
Sorry, one second here.
All right. So to start,
just to give you a little bit of
background on industrial loan losses,
since kind of a commercial banking term,
balance sheet forecasting term that not
everyone might have at least had previous
exposure to.
So industrial loan losses are financial
losses incurred by banks and financial
institutions when borrowers default on
loans or.
For example.
Fail to repay the principle and interest
is agreed upon in the terms of their note.
These are typically tied to commercial or
industrial loans.
Hence,
industrial loan loss that are extended to
companies for purposes such as like
capital investment.
Equity or equipment purchases or various
operational expenses?
So some of the key points here.
Some causes behind these losses are,
for example, borrower insolvency,
macroeconomic downturn,
industry specific challenges.
Especially like with the tariffs that
we're seeing now or just poor credit risk
management,
this is very impactful for financial
institutions,
especially since banks set aside
provisions for these losses.
Which reduces their capital reserves and
available liquidity.
So they're not able to.
Loan out that liquidity and collect
interest on it.
So very impactful.
And then these are typically reported as
a percentage of total loans.
Or as a net charge off ratio.
And then these provisions are forecasted
by banks and financial institutions since
they need the loan loss provision to
essentially total their expected.
Unpaid notes.
So you can see how critical it is that
they get this forecasting right.
And recently these aband between .
8% and 1% of total loans.
Yep.
So just stay on the same subject here to
show the financial ramifications of of
loan losses we see during the great
financial crisis.
It peaks at 230 billion for for allowance
for loan loss,
steadily goes down up until 2019 and then
spikes back.
Up to 210 billion during COVID.
It kind of underscores how provisioning
only jumps in reaction to crisis.
That's why we're building a predictive
model that flags trouble earlier.
Awesome.
So we saw this as a opportunity to
implement neural networks into this
problem,
mainly due to the complexity of
forecasting loan loss provisions that
goes on behind the scenes.
Neural networks are excellent for this
because they're great at identifying
nonlinear complex relationships such as
loan loss. Prov.
Forecasting.
So the ability to process
multidimensional data that is both
quantitative and qualitative,
especially seen in credit metrics.
Uh, sorry I here.
So sorry.
Sorry,
my computer's just messing up here a
little bit.
Oh,
so some of the key advantages of using.
A neural network are the proactive risk
management.
So like I said,
a more complex forecasting methodology
and then four.
So theoretically this tool would be given
to institutions on their forecasting team
and it can be a lot more adaptable,
especially when you retrain the model
based on past data.
And it's very scalable too and can
provide a lot of different insights.
And like I mentioned earlier.
The real world application of a model
like this,
I'm sure there's already institutions
that are implementing it,
but we just wanted to create our own.
Yep.
So just moving into the project statement
in the scope.
So as we mentioned,
we're building a neural network based on
credit risk.
We want to flag it before it hits the
P&L for for these companies.
That's the main, you know, driver of this.
That's the main reason why we have this
project to begin with.
It might seem like a little bit overkill
for this project,
but we're just beginning to benchmark it
again.
This more simple models and it turns out
that the accuracy even compared to a
simple linear regression is actually a
little bit stronger.
And maybe that's just due to the
variables that are getting input into the
model, but.
We have to handle sparse like default
rates.
There's a lot of missing borrower fields.
In success for us,
for this means a low RMSE.
Loss estimates plus solid default
detection.
Like a 01 will that will be able to
predict it based on that.
So yeah,
just moving into the techniques and
methodologies before I start this page,
I just want to say that we built this
just to learn more about neural networks.
It's pretty complex and just making the
the model framework took a lot of time.
And one other thing is other groups said
having the input data is really crucial
and found that out the hard way after we
are ready,
built the model and the accuracy was
really poor and there was a lot of.
You know,
a lot of missing fields that we had to
use Python code.
To normalize but to the right,
here is the initial well after our third
iteration or so results.
It does.
It is able to predict default and non
default but it's prediction for default
is is pretty weak.
We have an accuracy of 84%,
but that's mainly coming off of it's
getting the non default right,
but it's not.
So we're stating the default,
but that F1 score 2 for the non default.
Pretty good.
And it's it beats a coin flip,
at least with AOC.
So we could call that a win for us for
for now at least we might do some more
iterations beyond this, but.
It really underscores the need for having
like rich features,
making sure that those features actually
matter to what's going into the model.
We had the model way the the feature.
To be able to optimize it a little bit
better,
it performed about 5% more accurate just
from that little change in weighting.
But I think that there could still be
further refinement.
So yeah,
moving into the data sources and the
processing.
So we drew on three key pillars.
It was the loan origination data that
came from the SBA.
It included performance records if they
defaulted or not when they defaulted.
How much a loan was for some of the
things that we some of the variables we
had from that was if they had collateral
with them, how many employee,
how many jobs are supported by this lo?
And then we also used a lot of Fred data.
GDP growth, unemployment rate,
the industrial output.
But once again mentioning the challenges
and limitations of this data was pretty
hard to get.
The SBA had 530 thousand row or different
loan originations that we traded this
model off of.
So we did have a lot of data there,
but just even,
say GDP that comes out quarterly from the
Fred.
So we normalize that to be monthly.
As you can see in the graph to the right,
just so I was able to.
Match up with all those other variables
that were monthly.
And then here's just some of the
variables that we put into the model.
And what they look like?
In the middle you can see the confusion
matrix.
It does show that we did nail 10,
242 correct non defaults.
We did get not many,
but we did get some right correctly
predicted defaults.
So seeing the getting,
at least for the first couple iterations,
having that that mix to work from from
there.
Or at least the model is able to actually
correctly predict some from both sides of
the ale.
And then just for the results and
prototype. So in the top right here,
that was the first model that we were
going to go with.
Kind of realized we wanted to get
something more complex and wish that we
didn't do that because ended up kind of
biting us in the **** a little bit.
But with our first.
Prototype it was about 30% accurate,
which was terrible.
You're better off just flipping a coin at
that point.
Eventually through a couple iterations we
got above that 50.
50% so that is at least a little bit
better than than flipping a coin.
We also threw out time we didn't start
with the best source,
so we just kept cleaning up the sources
as we went,
which also made the the data a little bit
richer for us.
But still just need to keep iterating
this.
Further.
After kinda going through the model and
our iterations here,
we wanted to share some next steps and
some possible improvements for further
iterations in the model.
So we have developed a strong base so far
the model,
but there are some immediate things that
we can do to clean it up.
First being error diagnosis section.
That would be useful for the user.
So if this were theoretically to go out
to.
Institutional forecasting teams.
A module to allow them to easily view and
manipulate areas of the model that fail
the most.
A comparison module.
I think we have both agreed.
Would be very interesting too.
Comparing this model driven by neural
networks against more of a legacy model.
I think I would provide a good sense
check because especially when you're
going into a more complicated models like
this, it's good to.
To kinda check back on what you know just
to get a sense of the delta between the
two.
And another area to improve in our
analysis is data sources.
In the real World, Bank would have.
Every data point imaginable on their loan
originations.
So that'd be something that we don't
think would be a huge problem.
But in their in the intermediate it is
and then some long term enhancements that
could be added to improve the robustness.
Robustness of the model.
In augment feature engineering to enhance
existing variables through the creation
of things like interaction terms,
dummy variables and also lagged variables
as well as consistent back testing
schedule for this,
just to see how the performance drifts
away from previous quarters would also be
very beneficial.
And then since this project was
essentially trying to create our own
neural network,
we had a lot of reflections and great
learning opportunities.
Probably biggest thing was if your data
set is not.
Holistic in nature and is kind of dirty
in a sense.
It makes the actual modeling very
difficult.
'cause you have a whole new set of
challenges that you need to overcome.
We talked about this week after week and
it was something that constantly came up
and we went through a lot of different
data sources.
And then found the SBA data to be the
best.
Yeah. Overall, just.
Really seeing the complexity of neural
networks and I can only imagine what
institutional version of this would look
like compared to what we've produced thus
far.
Thank you ever any questions.
OK, perfect. I. Yeah,
I I I do love your your presentation of
the presentation deck looks pretty neat.
Thank you.
So my question will be you you said you
would like to have some benchmarks in the
future steps like what blocks you guys?
Creating some benchmark from the
beginning.
Yeah, that's a good question.
I think it was just the the initial
complexity of it kind of was overwhelming.
And then just keep working to get that
accuracy better and then you know,
Hello.
now feel that it accuracy's at a semi
decent spot.
So then started even earlier today,
just building out a linear regression.
The benchmark it against and and then you
know random forest probably as well.
We're going to do.
Right. So,
so you know this problem will be oh, oh,
sorry. I just set up a timer.
I forgot.
It's just pretty loud.
Yeah, because I I was.
I think that maybe you know this problem
will be really difficult to solve, right?
So then maybe you have like some
benchmarks, some really quick model.
As you mentioned, in the next step, right,
so that if you have really quick models
so they can help you understand well,
you know what,
it's a really hard problem to solve and
maybe you can try different models to
solve this problem and then try to
explore more.
Data.
So yeah,
so I I will say maybe setting up the
benchmark,
although the benchmark will be really,
really bad will be a really good you know
first step to do.
And the second question.
I will be.
It may not have an answer,
but I still wanna ask.
So you you guys mentioned like you want
to have more better data?
Like what exactly?
The data source.
You'll be exploring to add, right?
So the data may exist or the data may not
even exist.
So it is what it is, right?
So then, so then any thought on that?
Well,
so first we started looking at busy S&
P 500 constituents.
Mm hmm.
And found that.
Essentially,
in order to gather a large enough data
source through market data providers,
the actual variables that are listed,
such as net charge off ratio.
Hmm.
You know,
it's very it's very companywide and
balance sheet wide ratios.
Mm hmm.
And I think you know,
if this model were to,
I mean be essentially used for
forecasting in individual banks balance
sheet.
And you need much more granular data from
that and you know it's just very
difficult to find line by line
originations from a large institution.
So I think that's, you know,
we're going into this without the data
that you really need for this model to
truly work in the sense that it was made
for.
Isn't necessarily something that we can
get,
but through this process we're just
trying to find kind of the best,
best data sources and variables that we
can use. Tele get us close.
Hmm.
Sure.
Got it.
OK, perfect. Thank you.
Great, great work.
Of course.
Yeah. Thank you so much. All right.
Thank you.
Last, the group Group 2.
I'm not sure my screen real quick.
Perfect.
Natural market.
All right,
so turn it up and it's Patrick Kalbeck
myself and will ham my partner.
We did a grocery product pricing analysis
specifically focused on metro market for
data reasons.
So the core problem here is grocery
products. The prices, you know,
they're influenced by a lot of things,
could be sized product sized,
product servings, the ingredients.
Competition.
Many different things that go into
developing the proper price for a grocery
product.
This requires us to be very data-driven
and for a company to be very data-driven
when they're pricing these products and
when you're trying to develop dynamic
pricing,
you need to focus on the data to get
there.
So the scope of this project we primarily
focused on metro market due to the
availability of the data online.
So going into this project,
you know our questions starting out where
what was the best model for us to use to
determine pricing.
Go further along in the slides,
we'll go over that and then we're also
considering, you know,
what attribute or what quality of a
product.
It most influences the product's price,
so that could be anything from serving
size or ingredients like I mentioned
before.
So why is this relevant?
A lot of the presentations have been
about, you know, picking stocks,
things like that.
But for focused on pricing products
accurately and that's because, you know,
product pricing really helps to drive
revenue and profitability for a company.
Mispriced products causes lost sales,
which drives lower margins and lost sales
can cause, you know,
excess inventory and a product price too
low could cause increased demand and then
you know not enough inventory to get
there.
So you really want to be on point with
your pricing, especially in grocery,
which is known as one of the most
competitive industries when it comes to
pricing and it's challenging for
companies to get their products into the
store in the 1st place.
And if you get there.
You definitely want to make sure that
your product is priced accurately,
and as I mentioned previously,
you know dynamic pricing really allows
companies to increase the revenue and
profitability and increase those margins.
During times when inputs are changing.
You know, for example,
right now with tariffs going on,
input price could be changing a certain
ingredient in a product and it's nice for
the the grocery store like Metro market
for example to be able to accurately
predict that coming and make adjustments
to you know support.
Margins going forward with that
additional change and what's the
strategic value here for for a company
like Metro Market,
you know better understanding of how
these products are priced based on
different attributes.
Of the product,
you know things that can be driven off of
these tools are targeted promotions.
If we see one of the characteristics we
looked at was customer reviews.
So if we see a very high customer review,
you know consistently for a product,
you know I might want to run a promotion
up the price there a little bit you know,
get some premium pricing going within
that promotion based on the input data
that we are seeing.
Into these.
Models that we developed.
So what do we use here for mlai
techniques started out with AK and N
model similar to other groups,
just to build that baseline out,
and I thought this was a good model
because a lot of these products are most
likely priced similarly.
If you consider like BRE.
For example,
you know there's probably not a huge
difference between one bread to the other
in terms of pricing,
and you know that is a assumption,
but that's most likely the case.
And we did get a good,
good standard there from the K&
N model and we.
Were able to work off that.
The next the other model we use was the
decision tree and also a pretty simple
model based off rules.
A lot of you know kind of if statements
and the structure really helps to show
you know the uninformed view or how these
features drag price you know in.
This case considering if I were a data
analyst at Metro Market,
I need to present my findings to,
you know,
the boardroom or someone who is not as
intricately into the details of myself
and the tree model really helps me do
that.
And then lastly, the random forest model,
you know really a very accurate model as
other groups have mentioned and we kind
of saw the same and we did expect this to
be the most accurate going in given the
variables or the features we are working
with in this.
Model.
So going on to the data that we used will
Mm hmm.
will touch on this.
So the first issue that we ran into when
we decided to try to predict the prices
was that there is no easily accessible
database of food information.
So unlike stock trading,
there's just nowhere that we could find
that had food prices.
So we decided to make a web scraper and
create our own database of the option of
the.
Prices and we use metro Markets website
because they had.
The most consistent format when it came
to.
The HTML classes of the information.
Umm.
You want to go to next slide.
So for getting the data we started with
just some links to the different sections
of the metro market page,
starting with all the.
Products that started with A and then BC
all the way to Z and then we used API to
take each link and retrieve all of the
HTML associated with it,
which then left us with a very long list
of product information.
Ended up being a little over 100,
000 characters for each individual
product,
so it took a lot of effort to synthesize
it into just one list that contained the
names, prices, brands.
And a couple other.
Metrics,
but eventually we were able to get an
output that looked pretty good,
though it did take a long time to
calculate.
It took over half an hour to run the web
scraper and then it took almost 5 minutes
alone in the to do the the formulas just.
Them down took awhile.
So using more data would take even longer,
but it was doable and we got some some
pretty good data outputs.
Awesome. So the results of the K&M,
this is like our baseline again.
So we were able to see that, you know,
for some of these lower priced items were
somewhat accurate with the K&N model.
And again,
we are seeing patterns for products with
similar features that we were looking at
like ingredients,
but we had trouble looking at or.
Determining any prices for any products
you know higher in price,
as you can see in the picture here.
And you know,
this is greatly dependent on the data
sets that we are inputting.
As I go forward,
I'll talk a little bit more about some of
the stuff that really affected all of the
models. But for the KNN,
it really felt the brunt of the
challenges that we had with the data sets.
For the tree model, again,
I think the main reason we wanted to use
this was to get good visualization of the
logic that we are going through and
determining what the price of a product
could be.
So really seeing you know,
is the weight over this much and so on
and so forth.
And we did see that in the picture that I
showed earlier and this was slightly more
accurate than the K&
N model and much better at predicting the
higher priced items.
Although the lower priced items.
Still seem.
To, you know,
be a little bit hit or miss and again we
can,
you know the data set did 'cause some
instability here and there was
overfitting,
which I think is probably why we were
able to have a little bit better accuracy
with the higher priced items, but.
We saw similar issues in the lower priced
items or medium priced items as we did
with the KNN due to that overfitting.
And looking at the random forest,
you know I mentioned in the beginning of
the presentation was we wanted to figure
out what feature.
Was driving the pricing the most I think
looking at the graph you can see that
weight clearly drove the pricing the most,
which is pretty intuitive, right?
If you buy 24 of something rather than
one in the 24 ways the same.
That could cause an issue,
but if the 24 weighs more as you'd expect,
it's also most likely more expensive.
But I don't think that's where we get the
most value from this model.
I think you know ignoring the weight and
looking more so at like the brand,
the ingredients and so on and so forth is
where we really find the value from this
model past the int.
Part of the more heavy items most likely
going to weigh more because quantity may
may be higher.
One of the things that I did mention was.
The trouble that we're having with the
data set,
you know it was good to get quality data.
Data from the Metro market website.
One of the things is not every product
has the same number of ingredients,
of course, right?
So ended up, you know,
at this stage looking at the combined
ingredients.
So what is the sum of all the ingredients?
You know how many ingredients are in this
product rather than really looking at the
characteristics of each ingredient.
For example,
you know flour versus cornstarch in a
product. We're just looking at, you know,
there's two ingredients.
Instead of the actual characteristics of
the ingredients.
But I think going forward that'll be
something to try to dig into a little bit
more,
although that has turned out to be
somewhat challenging to make the model
work as an attended well,
trying to ignore the blank spaces in our
data set due to the mismatching in.
But overall,
the random forest results reduce the
overfitting that we saw and was able to
handle the data set quite a bit better.
And the other models that we used.
I should mention you know the weakness
here is if I were to try to present this
to some stakeholders,
it may be more challenging to, you know,
describe exactly what's going on here.
Although as we'll see the overall results,
you know, kind of tell the story for them.
We see much better performance in the
random forest than the other two models
overall,
although the MSE value is still pretty
high.
Here,
there's definitely some fine tuning still
to be done.
On these models.
And I think a lot of that has to do with
how we're interpreting the data we are
getting from the web scraper,
from the metro market site. Put overall,
I think we see that the random Forbes is
clearly performing a lot better than the
other two models.
All right.
So going into some of the next steps for
how we could improve our model.
Firstly a better user interface if this
was to be used by, say, metro market,
we would want to be able to make our
analysis more clear and easy to see we
also.
Could use some improvement in our data
collection and processing efficiency.
Like I said,
it took over half an hour for the web
scraper to run and then like multiple
minutes every time.
A formula was updated so we would wanna
make that better.
And then we also really wanna improve our
data consistency.
The table in the middle of the page shows
what the.
Weight output sometimes is and it can be
all over the board,
so just getting those a unified.
Specific output is very important and we
can also collect more data,
so that's like more nutrition information,
because right now we're just calculating
based on calories and then we could also
include sale information,
especially over time,
to see what discounts.
Affect the price as well as semantic
analysis of the comments 'cause every
every product has has comments on it and
so seeing what people actually think of
the products does affect the price a lot
as well as analysis of other companies
seeing how, say,
Walmart prices their food.
Based on ingredients would be beneficial
and then lastly it would be pretty
difficult to do, but it would be.
Cool to.
You use the future trading price of
ingredients to predict the current price
of a product.
So for example,
seeing what the future price of wheat is
and comparing it and seeing how it'll
change the price of say, bread.
So for our reflection,
the biggest take away that we had is that
data consistency is key.
The classic saying of garbage in garbage
out really is important.
Here we spend a lot of time cleaning our
data and making sure it was accurate,
but there's definitely more that we could
do.
And so that's that's the biggest take
away for us as well as more models gives
us more insights like the KNN didn't give
too much of an insight as to.
Value of.
The factors that we're tracking,
but using more models allowed us to get
more information as well as there's just
no perfect solution.
There's a lot of variables that we didn't
take account for that are just very
difficult to do.
So like a lot of like political things,
especially when it comes to ingredients,
because there's tariffs and whatnot for
foods.
And yeah.
So any questions?
My comment would be like I I I appreciate
the effort, I mean this.
Certainly.
I mean you guys create your data set
yourself.
Anything web scraper that's certainly
exceeded my expectation.
I appreciate that.
Thank you so much this this is awesome.
Why metro market?
So there's a couple websites that we
looked at.
Walmart was the first one,
but a lot of Walmart's product
Sure.
information actually isn't in the the
HTML.
They just have pictures of the products
and then from the pictures you can get
Sure.
Yeah.
the information but from just copying the
data there's no way to to get it easily.
Yeah, that, that that's my answer.
In my mind. I just want to confirm that.
Mm hmm.
OK, perfect, good.
Are the the the products information you
guys scripted from the website?
Are are those mainly food or beverages or
something?
Yeah,
it was just all the the grocery category
items.
OK, OK.
Yeah,
but I I do like your your use case that
you use a future.
Price to predict whether or not they're
gonna price up or down.
So I think that's a really good use case
of your model.
Appreciate that.
I think one last question.
In one slide,
you show the nutrition kind of fact.
What is that product?
That product was a loaf of bread.
Oh, I see. OK, OK.
What kind of brand is that?
Oh, let's see.
I have it up on a different tab.
I was guessing what is this one slide?
Umm.
So there is something.
Yeah, yeah, that was one size of.
It's called Sara Lee honey wheat bread.
Yeah.
Oh, OK, cool. Perfect.
Thank you.
Awesome. Great work.
Yeah.
Thank you so much.
I think that's that's all we have.
Thank you so much again.
Thank you so much for choosing this class.
So if you would spend another 5 minutes
finishing the the evaluation,
that will be perfect and also I send you
guys an e-mail volunteer for Friday's
board meeting. If you do have time,
you can just show them.
Just send me an e-mail.
Otherwise totally fine.
If you don't have time, you don't shut up.
OK.
So thank you so much.
I I hope you have a great future and then
sometime you can use whatever learn in
this class in in your future but anyways.
Glad you know,
spend time with you for three month and
then you.
I definitely learn a lot from you guys,
so my final comment will be thank you so
much and then I will see you guys in the
future.
Good luck.
Thank you, professor. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, professor.
Thank you.
Yep. Thank you.
Bye.